Imagine an employee asks you for a raise.
They tell you that they're struggling to make ends meet,
and without the raise,
they'll need to find a job that pays better.
Your company doesn't have much financial room for a raise,
but you also can't afford to hire a new person for the role.
Plus, the employee is very hardworking
and you sympathize with their situation.
So, what do you do?
Ethical dilemmas like this can leave us scratching our heads
because the choices aren't easy.
How do you choose when there seems to be no right answer?
Let's explore how conflicting values play a role
in those choices and how to approach resolving the dilemma.
An ethical dilemma occurs when there's a conflict
between two choices that present different values.
Why does that create a conflict?
Well, it's not always easy
to choose one important value over the other.
So, what are those conflicting values?
One common conflict is between truth and loyalty.
For example,
a bus driver whose coworker confesses to them
that they drink on their shift must choose
between telling the truth to their boss
or remaining loyal to their friend.
Another common conflict is the choice
between an individual and a community.
For example,
if a community is rationing medicine due
to a shortage of supplies,
should a community member
who is sick get more than their share?
Finally, many choices are about justice and mercy.
Let's say a longtime employee fails to lock up a store,
which is then robbed.
Is it more important to punish the employee justly
or show them mercy?
These value conflicts make choices
in an ethical dilemma tougher,
and sometimes a problem can have multiple conflicts
of values.
For example, a bus driver whose friend and coworker drinks
during shifts must consider truth and loyalty,
but they must also choose between the individual
and the community.
Now let's look at five approaches
to solving these ethical dilemmas.
One way to resolve ethical dilemmas is
by using the common good approach.
This approach says that tending
to the good of the whole ultimately benefits everyone.
For example, when a company protects the environment,
everyone benefits from clean air and water.
Or when a company prioritizes a safe workplace,
all employees benefit.
To apply this approach,
ask yourself, "Would most people benefit from this choice?
And what's the best thing to do for the whole group?"
Another approach emphasizes individual rights.
This approach is about making sure
our choices respect other's rights.
For example, a rights approach raises questions
like, "Am I ignoring someone else's rights?",
as well as, "What are my rights,
and are they being respected?"
A third approach values fairness in decision-making.
Under this approach,
there's no room for favoritism or discrimination.
To decide on whether to use this approach,
consider will this action favor one group over the other?
Does the same standard apply to everyone,
regardless of their sex, race, gender,
or other arbitrary factors?
Next, there's the virtue approach,
which is about living up to moral ideals
and seeking self-improvement.
When we make decisions using this approach,
we can look for opportunities to improve ourselves morally.
Ask yourself, "What virtues are at stake here,
and will this decision help me improve as a person?"
Finally, consider the utilitarian approach
to help you look at a problem
from a practical point of view.
Under this approach, the goal of any decision is
to maximize happiness and minimize harm.
Ask yourself,
"Does this choice benefit the maximum number of people?
Which decision would cause the least harm?"
When values conflict, ethical dilemmas occur.
Between truth and loyalty,
individual and community, or justice and mercy,
it's hard to know which values are more important.
Using different approaches can help us understand things
more clearly.
But remember, there is no single approach
that works for all dilemmas.
Practice applying each of the five approaches
in different situations.
That way you can make thoughtful choices
that have a positive impact.